POLDARK: I thought this
day would never come.
Expectations are high.
Pray God we don't
disappoint them.
Aye.
TRENEGLOS:
A pleasant change,
to see a mine opening.
For how long, I wonder?
My friends, when my father
closed this mine 20 years ago,
he little thought
it would have a future.
Today, with your help, labor,
and good wishes,
we aim to prove him wrong.
Gentlemen, ladies, I declare
the Wheal Leisure mine open.
(cheers and applause)
'Tis a grand thing ye done,
Ross.
Thank you, Ross.
Zacky...
Mark.
Can't thank you enough.
Then don't.
If all goes well,
it's I who'll be thanking you.
Sir.
I'm that glad, sir.
For the miners and their
families, and for you, sir!
My neck's on the line.
Are you glad about that?
Oh, no, sir.
For what shall I do
if it come to grief?
DR. CHOAKE: Are the rumors
true, do you think?
Well, he's a damned fool
if they're not.
FRANCIS:
I take it you've forgiven him?
He saved your life.
Time for you to demonstrate
it wasn't wasted.
I have no mine to resurrect.
You have one to keep alive.
Start by stemming the leakage
of workers from our mine to his.
Well, that's easier said
than done.
Our wages are hardly
an incentive to stay.
POLDARK: We will have iron
ladders down the main shaft.
Iron?
Wood rots.
It'll cost you.
Better me than a man's life.
(metal clanging in the distance)
Two shafts have been sunk,
but it's hard going.
We struck ironstone
almost at once.
We may yet require gunpowder.
More expense then?
Aye, but don't
be discouraged.
Where there's ironstone,
there's often copper.
There.
Do you mark that?
Chase that and we'll hope
to catch copper.
(coins jangle)
PRUDIE:
Don't you!
JUD:
Take that!
Don't you hit me again!
Judas!
I can hear you kicking up
a dido three mile away!
'Tis this great buffle head!
Hush your creening, woman!
You think cheese
wouldn't choke you!
Be she who started it.
Mr. Ross's rum again?
He won't miss it.
His head be fair full
of the mine.
(sobbing):
He's gone and broke me arm!
(sighing):
Let's see.
It is only a sprain,
but you'll not be fit
to cook vittles
this three week.
You must step into
the breach, then!
It's all right, child,
Prudie'll instruct you.
Talk of the blind
leading the blind?
Well, don't just
stand there,
brew us a dish of tea
while I rest me broken wing.
(pot slams loudly)
(bell ringing)
Ross, have you got a minute?
By all means.
It's young Jim.
What's he been up to now?
My Jinny.
Poaching's
a capital offense.
Believe me, I'm acquainted
with the niceties of the law.
It's not for my sake, Ross,
it's for me mother and sisters.
I can't see them starve.
And Jinny?
Sir?
Is her welfare
of equal concern to you?
Her father tells me
she's with child.
Yes, sir, and I mean to do right
by her when I can afford it.
Damn it, man,
the girl's frantic!
Why didn't you
come to me before?
Why, Ross,
but could ye do?
It wants some small repairs.
But nothing to pay?
You'd be doing me a favor
keeping it clean and dry.
(coughs)
'Tis more than we could ever
have hoped.
Well, then,
that's settled.
So now what's your excuse?
Sir?
Don't keep the girl waiting!
Be off to her father,
and while you're at it,
see Reverend Odgers
about getting the banns read.
And get rid of those nets.
Let's have
no more poaching.
So Prudie's recovery
may take some time?
Happen a month or so, sir.
Have her delay it
as long as possible.
(band playing)
I wish you could
forget him, my dear.
(voice breaking):
Is love so easy to forget?
Forgive me.
I didn't mean to--
I didn't mean to suggest...
(gasps)
(groans and exhales)
(bell rings)
Mrs. Tabb,
send for Dr. Choake!
(band playing)
REVEREND ODGERS: I wonder you do not
think of marriage, Captain Poldark?
I dare say I shall
in due course.
Always remembering the purpose
for which it was ordained?
In particular?
As a remedy against sin
and to avoid fornication?
MRS. ZACKY:
We can't thank you enough.
Any man would do the same.
"Any man" would not.
The only son.
ZACKY: And since his
father bit the dust...
There's next to nothing coming
into the household.
(breathing heavily)
(groans softly)
(groans)
(band continues playing)
♪♪
CHARLES:
A grandson!
The line continues.
Well done, my boy!
Thank Elizabeth.
She did the work.
Ah, women, they make a song
and dance about it,
but if things are
properly managed...
A new Poldark!
(Demelza singing)
(snoring)
(door slams)
A letter...
A letter come from Trenwith.
Francis and Elizabeth
have a son.
(woman giggling)
Ah, Ross.
We were just saying, any man
opening a mine these days
must be exceptionally brave
or extremely foolish.
How so?
Well, in these dire
economic times.
Which might be less dire
were they not in the hands
of those whose only purpose
is to make a profit.
What other purpose
is there?
Perhaps you should ask those
who exist on starvation wages.
Perhaps if you fraternized less
with the lower orders
you'd feel their woes
less keenly.
One does feel that
the gentry and the vulgars
should keep to themselves.
Otherwise it gets so confusing.
Good day.
AUNT AGATHA:
Have we been introduced?
I seem to recall
you're related to me.
Forgive me, Aunt.
I've had much
to attend to of late.
How are you?
How should I be with
Mistress Glumps for company?
CHARLES: Verity is well rid
of that Scoundrel, Blarney.
I trust you've learnt
the folly of interference?
It won't be repeated,
I assure you, Uncle.
What do you make
of my grandson?
Please...
A fine-looking boy,
is he not?
Like his father.
And his mother?
I congratulate you both.
Please.
Ah, George.
You look pale.
I've been stronger.
I'd hoped you would be
named godfather.
But Francis and George
are inseparable these days.
Look at Geoffrey Charles.
He's smiling at you!
ROSS:
I can't imagine why.
(indistinct chatter)
Elizabeth?
(glass clinking)
CHARLES:
Ladies and gentlemen.
This is a proud day
for the Poldarks.
Behold the future:
Geoffrey Charles Poldark,
heir to the great
Trenwith estate.
And when I have taken leave
of this world,
and Francis has taught the boy
all he knows...
(quietly):
That shouldn't take long.
CHARLES:
Our great Poldark dynasty...
will continue and...
(groans)
This wind-- damn me!
Dr. Choake, quickly.
Father...
Carry him through,
come on.
On a christening day?
And the child named after him?
'Tis a sign.
Mark my words.
Of course a gentleman knows
where to draw the line.
Towards a lady of his own class,
his intention should be
strictly honorable.
Towards a woman
of the lower class,
however...
Indeed, it's all very
disagreeable, but men are men.
When Peter called
some months ago,
there was the hussy already
beginning to put on airs.
I saw her riding to church,
bold as brass,
all fit up in a scarlet cloak.
MRS. WARLEGGAN: It's too bad,
tarnishes the family name,
and my Elizabeth
would undoubtedly...
Proof, if proof
were needed.
That Ross Poldark
is no gentleman.
Hyah!
Good night,
my darling boy.
(door opens)
My poor wife,
neglected as usual.
How is your father?
Rallying-
Despite Choake's efforts.
You look very lovely,
my dear.
Perhaps another night?
I still feel a little weak.
You seemed most animated
this afternoon.
With Ross.
That's hardly fair.
"Oh, Ross, look at my baby.
"See how he smiles at you.
Don't you wish
that he was yours?"
How can you say that?!
Of course, Ross would never
even think such a thing.
No, I'm sure
he would not!
(door slams)
(baby cries)
Listening at keyholes?
I've been tending to Father.
No doubt you'll take
Elizabeth's side.
Against whom?
Or Ross's!
I take no one's side!
Had it been left to him,
you would be in Falmouth now
living with that scoundrel
in shame and misery!
I don't regard marriage
as misery.
That's because you have yet
to experience it.
(quietly):
For which I have you to thank.
((109 barks)
(whispering):
Jim.
(loud thrashing)
JINNY:
Jim's a good man,
and it is good he should
want to provide for his family,
but not with poaching.
It's too dangerous.
Could you maybe ask Captain Ross
to tell him to stop?
DEMELZA: Mr. Ross, can
I speak to thee, sir?
Mr. Ross, sir?
(snoring)
Sir?
Mr. Ross?
"We-heal"... Wheal.
"Leh-i-sir."
♪♪
ROSS:
Demelza?
Captain Poldark, sir?
Do you need me?
FRANCIS:
A heart stroke?
But Choake says you'll recover?
Choake's a fool.
And I am not immortal.
So this is your chance.
To do what?
Step up to the mark.
You do recall
we have a mine?
Yes, but...
It requires presence.
Direction.
Leadership.
Yours.
(loudly):
Yours!
L-I know little of...
Learn.
Fast.
If your cousin continues
to pay decent wages,
we'll soon have no one left
at Grambler.
Take a leaf out of
your cousin's book.
Does he keep his distance?
Does he watch from afar?
Or does he roll up his sleeves
and toil alongside his men?
Good day to you all.
CHARLES". Which do you think
will yield the better result?
How much longer do you think
before we eat'?
And perhaps if there's
some bread.
And maybe some...
...Ale.
Have you eaten?
I do sometimes forget to, sir.
Eat now.
Sit.
You finished
the lower field?
Yes, sir, and tomorrow
I be starting
on the meadow.
You get through more in a day
than Prudie in a month!
I be young, sir, and strong.
And not bone idle.
I heard Jinny was over.
How is she?
In truth, sir?
She's that worried.
About what?
Jim and his poaching.
I thought perhaps you could
tell him to stop.
I'll do more than that.
I've a better job for him.
Assistant purser
at the mine.
Oh, Jinny'll be that glad!
Why must you go?
We don't need nothing more.
Captain Poldark did give you
work, and this cottage, and...
It's not just for we, Jinny.
Captain Poldark do help us,
but I can't ask him to help
my mother and sisters.
And since father be gone,
who else can put bread
in their mouths but I?
She'd not wish you
to take such risk.
There will be no more
after tonight.
You have me word.
I won't be long.
(door opens)
You know I love you.
Demelza, do we have
any of that...
Brandy, sir?
Last of that hid in
the cupboard from France?
Exactly so.
Anything else?
Yes, if you could somehow
avoid the inference
that I'm utterly predictable?
Yes, sir.
I'll try, sir.
(birds chirping)
(coughing)
(footsteps approaching)
C)y!
(gunshot)
(knock at door)
(sobbing)
POLDARK:
I shouldn't have waited.
I should have made him
the offer last night!
What will you do?
Visit Sir Hugh Bodrugan,
the owner of the pheasants.
Ross Poldark!
Are you joining
the hunt, sir?
Thank you, no.
But I would be grateful
for five minutes of your time.
What can I do for you?
The poacher taken last night
on your land?
As magistrate, you'll have
hearing of the case?
He's an employee
of mine.
Is he, by God!
I would happily make good
anyl oss
if he could be let off
with a severe warning.
(chuckling): Blast me, sir,
he's on his way to Truro jail!
I had him committed for trial
at 8:00 this morning.
You were in haste, sir.
There was no time to lose--
the hunt starts at 9:00!
It's a damned disgrace
the amount of good game
going lost of late.
Hangings barely good enough
for the villain!
(hunting horn blares
in the distance)
ROSS: They disgust
me, my own class.
Not all of them, but most.
How is it, sir, that you be
not like them?
Perhaps I am.
No, no, sir, they don't
see us like you do.
There's folk with hurts
and feelings, same as they.
Sometimes I fail to see
that too, Demelza.
Sometimes I barely see
what's right in front of me.
He's just a lad, sir.
They must sure let him go.
You would think so.
Is Jinny ready?
She can't go, Ross.
"Us her time.
(Jinny groaning)
Bring him safe home, Ross.
DR. HALSE:
It was being unemployed by you
in soliciting that pardon
from the Almighty which I trust
your prayers may obtain
through the merits
of your Redeemer,
whose first attribute is mercy.
It now only remains to me
to pass the dreadful sentence
of the law, which is
to transportation.
Take him away.
(crowd shouts and boos)
(bangs gavel)
(whispering):
What was his crime?
Poaching.
Award, sh"?
Oh... don't tell me.
More funds required?
No, another matter entirely.
You treated Jim Carter when
he worked at Wheal Reath?
Convulsive asthma,
a morbid condition
of the lungs.
Did for his father,
as I recall.
Why do you ask?
Only with evidence
of ill health
and testament
of good character,
I'd hope we could get
the charge dismissed.
Dismissed'?
I doubt his lungs would
survive a stint in jail.
To be frank with you, sir, I've
no great sympathy for your aims.
No good will come of being
sentimental about such folk.
They're a different
breed, sir.
A different breed.
MAN:
Call James Carter.
(door opens)
Will you join me?
I have an estate to run.
One game won't hurt.
So he was caught red-handed?
And according to Sir Hugh,
there's scarcely a pheasant
left in his woods?
You may stand down.
Is there any defense
in this case?
May I ask the indulgence
of the court?
You have some evidence you wish
to give in this man's defense?
I wish to give evidence
of his good character.
He's my servant.
Take the witness stand, sir.
(crowd murmuring)
(bangs gavel)
No doubt, on the evidence
you've heard,
you will see nothing
exceptional in this case.
In your long experience I'm sure
there are many such cases
especially in times
when hunger, poverty,
and sickness
prevail amongst the poor.
Keep to the matter
in hand, sir.
I've reason to believe that the
accused fell into bad company
with an older man who has
so far escaped punishment.
He has a wife, a mother,
and four sisters to support.
Evidence, sir?
Pertaining to the crime itself?
I have it on the authority
of Dr. Choake of Sawle
that Jim Carter is suffering
from a chronic lung condition
which may prove fatal.
I myself am prepared
to stand surety
for his future employ
and good behavior.
Is it your contention, sir,
that the prisoner is not
in a fit state of health
to go to prison?
It is, sir.
And furthermore, this very day
he will become a father
for the first time.
(crowd murmuring)
(bangs gavel)
The prisoner was ill
when he went poaching?
He's been ill for some time.
And his wife has been
with child "for some time"?
It appears to me that if a man
is well enough to go poaching
he's well enough to take
the consequences
whether or not it adversely
affects his wife and child.
PRUDIE: And when you get home there
be calves to be meated and...
Who be this here, then?
PRUDIE:
That be the maid's father.
DEMELZA:
What can he be wanting?
So... you be here still.
And content too, Father.
And I hope you are too.
Take a look at me, daughter.
What do you see?
What's happened?
I be married.
The Widow Chegwidden
have raised me up and brought me
out to meet the Lord.
Meaning what?
Meaning farewell drink
and living in sin.
We live a good life now,
daughter.
And we be fixing
to have you back.
'Tis a fine woman
I've married, child.
And they do think you be better
with me than staying here
exposed to all temptations...
of flesh and the devil.
Temptations?
You don't know of what I speak.
Confess, daughter,
what sin there is
twixt you and Poldark.
There's no sin!
He's my master,
and I'm his servant.
And more besides,
if tales be true.
What's it to me what folks say?
Not to thee maybe,
but I want no daughter of mine
mixed up in such talk.
Since when were you
so tender to me?
Since the Lord opened my heart
and shone his light.
So I give you a day
to make it right with Poldark,
and then I'll be back here again
to fetch you home.
(sobs)
You paint a vivid picture
of the hardships endured
by the poor, sir.
Still, a man's needs should
not determine his honesty,
else all beggars would be
thieves.
(crowd murmuring)
(bangs gavel)
However, in view of these
extenuating circumstances
and your testimony
of Carter's good character,
the court is prepared to take
a more lenient view.
Sentenced to two years
imprisonment.
(crowd murmurs)
(coughs)
Well, I trust I shall never
have the misfortune
to have the "leniency"
of the court extended to me!
Have a care, Mr. Poldark.
Such remarks are not entirely
outside the court's
jurisdiction.
No.
Only mercy enjoys
that privilege.
One moment, sir.
You take issue
with the laws of this land?
I can't help but feel
that in this case
justice would have been
best served by clemency.
Happily for justice,
this court is better able
to interpret the law than you.
Then the law is savage and you
interpret it without charity!
The book from which you preach
says that man shall not live
by bread alone!
These days you're asking him
to live without even that!
Step down, Mr. Poldark,
or we'll have you committed
for contempt of court.
I can assure you,
such a committal would be
an entirely accurate reading
of my thoughts!
(door opens and closes)
DEMELZA:
How can I go'?
I can't live nowhere else.
'Till I came
I never lived at all.
I can't leave here.
(quietly):
I can't leave him.
(sighs)
He'll make me go.
He won't care.
I'm not so important
to him as he is to me.
Spare yourself
the trouble, child.
He'll not be home tonight.
What cheer,
Captain Poldark?
Precious little.
I could remedy that.
You could not.
(sniffles)
Nobody could.
Then I shall take my consolation
where it's more appreciated.
(men laughing)
A Poldark you say?
Not a Poldark.
(gasps)
(giggles)
The Poldark.
Of Trenwith House.
Lord bless you, sir.
What other Poldark is there?
(man shouting, rats squeaking)
MAN:
Let me out!
'Twas more than good
of you to try, Ross.
Don't thank me.
I failed miserably.
(man groaning)
(softly):
Jinny...
(sighs)
Goodbye.
Goodbye, goodbye... goodbye.
(sobbing): I can't leave
him, I can't, I can't...
But I must.
ROSS:
Demelza!
(louder):
Demelza.
Sir?
Close the window.
Yes, sir.
(window closes)
Jud and Prudie a-bed?
Yes, sir, long since.
Fetch me the rum.
Yes, sir.
Jim Carter got two years.
I feared it might be worse.
I doubt he'll survive.
You did all you could.
Did I?
I doubt it.
I was too concerned
with my own dignity.
Groveling and compliments
were the order of the day,
and I made the mistake of trying
to teach them their business.
A schoolboy error,
and Jim paid dearly for it.
Demelza?
What are you wearing?
I found it, sir, in one of
the chests in the library.
You dare to go rifling
through those things?
I'm sorry, sir, you never
told me I shouldn't look.
Surely that was obvious?
You're employed as a maid.
I know, sir.
And you've been a good one.
And for that you're allowed
certain liberties.
But dressing up in fine clothes
is not one of them.
I meant no harm, sir, 'twas just
rotting away in that old box.
Take it off.
I thought maybe you might
let me wear it sometimes.
Take it off now!
If you don't take it off
this minute,
you can pack your things
and go back to your father.
(sobs)
Demelza, enough,
enough now.
I shouldn't have spoken
so harshly.
(sobs)
Don't take it
to heart.
It's been a hellish day
and I'm not myself.
What is it? What've I done?
I didn't take you from
your father for this.
What do it matter
what you took me for?
Go to bed.
Sir...
Go to bed-- now.
(knock at door)
What is it?
(softly):
The dress.
It unfastens down the back.
(softly): You know
what people say of us?
(softly):
Yes.
If we behave like this,
it will be true.
Then let it be true.
(birds chirping)
♪♪
(harp playing)
Where's Francis?
He did not come home last night.
VERITY: He'll have stayed
in town with George.
That upstart?
Has he been going to the mine?
I'm sure he has.
CHARLES:
Elizabeth?
Is he attending to his duties?
Of course he is, sir.
Where's Demelza?
Haven't seen her.
When she appears, tell her
to start in the barley field.
You and I will set to
with the hay.
Aye, sir.
L, sir?
You, sir.
Without Jim to cover
your idleness,
you may be forced
to break a sweat occasionally.
(door closes)
'Tisn't right.
(thrashing)
JUD: They be saying Jim Carter
won't last five minutes
in Bodmin Jail.
If the fever don't get him,
starvation will.
Still, if someone we know
hadn't spoke up for him,
he'd be on his way
to seven years transportation.
(door opens)
An unexpected pleasure.
I was passing this way and...
I was sorry to hear
about your farm boy.
Reverend Halse plays cards
with the Warleggans.
And?
Perhaps if you'd
approached George
things could
have been arranged?
Is that how justice works?
We both know it, Ross.
How's Geoffrey Charles?
He's my joy.
Our joy.
I heard blasting
as I came by Wheal Leisure.
Have you hit ironstone?
This is a new interest?
Francis thinks it's unladylike,
but how else can I understand
the business
on which our fortunes,
and those of our tenants,
depend.
You always had
an inquiring mind.
Marriage discourages
such a thing.
Always?
Perhaps it depends
on the partners.
(door opens)
Beg your pardon, sir, ma'am.
Can I get you anything, ma'am?
Prudie's served us.
Her arm seems recovered.
Yes, sir.
I'll just see to these flowers.
They're very pretty.
Would you like them?
Oh!
Thank you.
But I'm afraid they won't last.
See, they're fading
already.
Cornflowers are like that.
I must go.
I'll see you out.
(barks)
(metal scraping)
Demelza?
Where's Demelza?
Last I seen her she were
heading towards Sawle
with that blathering dog
at her heels.
ROSS: I engaged you
for two years.
What do you mean
by running away?
Sir, I...
Haven't you been well treated?
Aren't you grown used
to the house,
and your tasks,
and my moods?
Yes sir, but...
Do you not give me what I want
before I even ask?
Yes, sir, but I thought,
after what happened.
You thought you would no longer
be my servant.
Not from choice, sir.
You're right.
You can no longer be my servant.
REVEREND ODGERS". Dearly beloved,
we are gathered together here
in the sight of God,
to join together
this man and this woman
in holy matrimony...
Ross Vennor Poldark,
do you take this woman to be
your lawful wedded wife?